---
title: a prayer {wet eros}
date: 2025-01-08
tags:
  - ritual
  - imaginal
  - collectivesoulmaking
  - soul
  - eros
---

o, o, oh god 
<br/>
the body yawns open into a well  
<br/>
maw dripping and wet
<br/>
helpless, hungry, desirous
<br/>
<br/>
**”aliveness, come alive.”**  
  <br/>
  <br/>
your mothers told you in their silence:  
<br/>
		*there is a sea beneath the sea*  
		*just you wait (giggles)*  
		*longing tastes so salty* 
<br/>
<br/>
**I want but I can’t have!**  
<br/>
your voice sounds shrill, grating
<br/>
submissive, baby-like, needy 
<br/>
legs tense open, stupid surrender 
<br/>
curling knees up, tail curled  
<br/>
<br/>
pour me open, trembling vase  
the waterfall is a neck thrown back
<br/>
<br/>

*ever-present body of water*  
*waiting to consume you*  
*rolling, crashing, crushing*

  <br/>
  <br/>

**”aliveness, come alive.”**  
  

  <br/>
<br/>
				{ a note: licks of lover’s spit. 
				<br/>
				You will destroy me. 
				<br/>
				You will take everything from me. 
				<br/>
				And I will give it to you. Willingly. 
				<br/>
				Wantonly. 
				<br/>
				} 
<br/>
<br/>
  
fight futile and fair
<br/>
throw punches at stormy sea 
<br/>
dominate the domination  
<br/>
all hail the dominion of life  
<br/>
<br/>
you see:  
lineages of mothers warn me  
they too know the helplessness  
hunger for soul in their wombs 
<br/>
<br/>

*it is a terrible kind of surrender*
*don’t worry darling*
*you’ll learn to love it*

<br/>
<br/>

**"aliveness, come alive."** 
<br/>
<br/>
hollowed out, a vessel to pour 
<br/>
An ocean of tears. 
<br/>
Salt water run through 
<br/>
veins and tributaries of aliveness
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
**hail mary, full of grace** 
<br/>
<br/>

guide me through the **seven gates of intimacy** 

  
<br/>

*gate one:* submitting

  <br/>

*gate two:* falling 

  <br/>

*gate three:* dissolving 

  <br/>

*gate four:* tearing
<br/>
  

*gate five:* devouring

  
<br/>
*gate six:* nothing is left. dust to dust. empty plate licked saliva clean. 
<br/>
*gate seven:*  
n o w  
e v e r y t h i n g 

  
<br/>
  
	e 

		v 

			e 

				r 

					y 

						t 

							h 

								i 

									n 

										g 

  
  
  <br/>
  <br/>
  

*Amen.* [sic]  
  
<br/>
<br/>
**
*–- written August 27, 2024* 