---
title: a prayer {wet eros}
date: 2025-01-08
tags:
  - ritual
  - imaginal
  - collectivesoulmaking
  - soul
  - eros
draft: "false"
---


```

o, o, oh god 
the body yawns open into a well  
maw dripping and wet
helpless, hungry, desirous


	”aliveness, come alive.”


your mothers told you in their silence 
  
		there is a sea beneath the sea  
		just you wait (giggles)  
		longing tastes so salty

I want but I can’t have!  
  
your voice sounds shrill, grating
submissive, baby-like, needy 
legs tense open, stupid surrender 
curling knees up, tail curled  

pour me open, trembling vase  
the waterfall is a neck thrown back


		ever-present body of water  
		waiting to consume you  
		rolling, crashing, crushing


	”aliveness, come alive.”  
  

				{ a note: licks of lover’s spit. 
				
				You will destroy me. 
				You will take everything from me. 
				And I will give it to you. Willingly. 
				Wantonly. 
				
				} 

  
fight futile and fair
throw punches at stormy sea 
dominate the domination  
all hail the dominion of life  

  
you see:  
lineages of mothers warn me  
they too know the helplessness  
hunger for soul in their wombs 

  
		it is a terrible kind of surrender
		don’t worry darling
		you’ll learn to love it

  
	"aliveness, come alive."


hollowed out, a vessel to pour 
An ocean of tears. 
Salt water run through 
veins and tributaries of aliveness



hail mary, full of grace 

guide me through the seven gates of intimacy 

  
		gate one: submitting

  
			gate two: falling 


				gate three: dissolving 


					gate four: tearing


						gate five: devouring


							gate six: nothing is left. 
							dust to dust. 
							empty plate 
							licked saliva clean. 


								gate seven:  
								n o w  
								e v e r y t h i n g 

  

  
e 

	v 

		e 

			r 

				y 

					t 

						h 

							i 

								n 

									g 

  
  
  
  
  
Amen. [sic]  



–- written August 27, 2024 